Statement of Interest Rodrigo Coronado
 UBC Master of Data Science

In a recent conversation I had with a key stakeholder from Golder Associates, (an energy environmental company operating from 165 offices worldwide), we discussed a common project to measure environmental contamination in some areas along the Bow River in Alberta. The project which was requested by one of their oil and gas customers, took several months to complete, produced static results with long waiting times, and used a manual and non-repeatable process.
The project included the right group of line managers and environmental scientists who got the job done.  However the baggage of their legacy data processes and traditional methods, made them incapable of leveraging the amount and complexity of data that an environmental project like this generates. In contrast, companies with mature processes, use streamlined data methods to capture, process and analyze data, which helps them proactively detect and predict operational issues that could otherwise cause future environmental complications. This acquired knowledge could easily enable the stakeholders create a holistic environmental strategy for the group of projects in the same vicinity.
Throughout the last 13 years I worked with Microsoft, marketing, selling and leading business solutions for a diverse set of industries. And in the last 8 years I was appointed as a Principal Strategist for a selected group of Canadian companies with global operations, including Suncor Energy, Husky Oil, Talisman Energy, Nexen Energy, Golder Associates and TransAlta. In this position, I headed the overall enterprise solutions strategy, where I led business intelligence, field mobility, collaboration and multiple business solutions practices, which earned me the 2012 and 2013 Top Contributor Award in Microsoft Canada.
Positioned as a strategic advisor for these set of enterprises, I have frequently ran into the “Golder” example over and over, realizing the chain of events it creates. For example, talking to Suncor Energy’s vendor management lead for their environmental division, Suncor relies on numerous environmental suppliers for their Oil Sands Projects, all of which similar to Golder still use manual and traditional data methods, generating isolated and one-time environmental data reports every time, muting the potential benefits that Data Science could bring to the organization, industry, government and communities.
All these encounters along my career have made me better acquainted with the gap of skillful resources needed to transform all this data into valuable, meaningful, and actionable knowledge; and the huge opportunity to assist C-level executives in understanding the benefits of integrating a holistic data science practice with their strategic vision.
I am proud of the work and experience I have accumulated in my career and this has affirmed my passion to assist enterprises reach their business potential. Continuing along these avenues in graduate school, I would take the enterprise solutions knowledge, the traditional data projects and industry experience I have gained along my career, as the foundation for my Master in Data Science, and at the end, acquire the knowledge to assist executives embed data science into their business models. I would love to do this by leading the design, implementation and execution of data science practices.
All these have given me the passion to search and research for programs and institutions that best suit my existing set of experiences and needs. I was thrilled to learn about the unique interdisciplinary approach from the Data Science program at UBC, the deep research experience from the directors of Statistics and Computer Science, and their active collaboration in the industry and organizations; key set of elements to foster fruitful discussions on Data Science techniques and methods, its applicability, and how to effectively communicate the results and strategy. This differentiated the Master of Data Science at UBC from many other institutions I researched that focus on only one angle. In addition, my experience in the energy industry, leading enterprise business solutions and working with global organizations, I hope, could benefit and enrich the discussions with other colleagues in the program.
